Once around wolf 359.
So in the constellation of Leo lying
very very close to the line of the
ecliptic where the planets and the sun
tend to pass around the sky from our
point of view. Uh caused of course by
really us orbiting around the sun is a
little tiny red dwarf star very faint at
magnitude 13.5
marked on the diagram there. You can see
it as the red dot just near that red
line. And that's the ecliptic just
passing by the brightest star in Leo,
Regulus.
And this star is very famous. It's Wolf
359.
Number 359 in Wolf's catalog of stars
that he made because they showed high
degree of proper motion across the sky.
So proper motion is where nearby stars
seem to change their position year on
year on year against the background of
much much more distant stars that do
change but on incredibly long time
scales. And so Wolf 359 was measured and
recorded at 4.7 arc seconds per year.
Um, an arc second is a 60th of an arc
minute, which is a 60th of a degree. So,
4.7 of these is not very much at all.
These took very, very sensitive
measurements to track down. And once
you've identified a star that has a high
proper motion,
it's worth trying to look at the
distance using the parallax method. You
uh use the Earth's orbit as a baseline
and work out how far away the star is.
again by its annual motion caused again
by the Earth going from one side of its
orbit to the other giving you a 300
million kilometer long baseline for a
very very long thin triangle and you can
work out the distance and that came to
7.9 light years for Wolf 359. Now, I've
got this sort of radar plot of the stars
in and around the neighborhood of Saul,
our sun. And you can see we have the
Alpha Centuri group, we have Barnard
star, and just down at the bottom there,
we have Wolf 359.
And the brown arrows are indicating the
direction of movement and speed. You can
see that Alpha Center is coming towards
us quite fast, as is a little group
called Lumen 16, which is a subject of
another video. But Wolf 359 is just
slowly moving away from us. I say
slowly, 19 km/s.
That's about the same speed that the
Earth orbits the Sun, so it's pretty
fast by human standards. But the sun is
doing several hundred kilometers per uh
second around the uh center of the
galaxy. And Wolf 359 moves around the
galaxy as well. It's part of what's
known as the population of old disc
stars on an orbit that takes it from
about 20,000 20,500
light years to about 28,000. So slightly
elliptical orbit around the center of
the galaxy with a modest eccentricity of
0.16 there. 0 would be perfectly
circular.
And
as with the sun, these orbits are
perturbed and deflected by the gravity
of the mass in the spiral arms and in
other structures within the Milky Way.
And so it moves above and below the
galactic plane as it goes around by
about plus or minus 500 uh sorry 400
lighty years. The thickness of the disc
of the Milky Way is perhaps between 1
and 5,000 lighty years depending on
where you define the edge. So it's a
significant portion but not outrageous.
So, Wolf 359, I said it was a small
faint red dwarf star, and it is. It's
one of the smallest stars that we know
of. It's just 11% the mass of our sun,
14% the radius, and only 40% larger than
the planet Jupiter. And I love this
graphic that really illustrates that.
And with that low mass goes a low rate
of nuclear fusion. You have low
temperatures and low pressures in the
core. So, these are quite slow burners.
And the temperature on the surface of
Wolf 359 is just 2,800 Kelvin. Uh below
that 3,000 that we normally associate
with being red hot. So, this is a very
cool star indeed. Um it goes with the
territory. It's only got 1,000th of the
total heat output of our sun. um it's
burning away so slowly. And you can see
that with with roughly onetenth of the
radius, you would have 1/100th of the uh
surface area. Um but the power output is
1/ 1,000th. And that's a reflection of
the way that the lower temperature also
reduces the power. Um all down to Stefan
Boltzman law, which I've discussed in
other videos.
Now, the age is a little bit more
difficult with this one. It seems to be
problematic.
There's a very wide range somewhere from
at least 100 million to 1.5 billion
years.
And the lower bound of 100 million
is because we can't see any lithium in
the surface of the star. And this is
because these smallsized stars burn
lithium. A uh nuclear fusion occurs with
either of the isotopes of lithium.
Lithium 7 is gets hit by a proton and
then fish in fact to two helium nuclei.
So you can view it as induced fishision
if you want to think about it that way
and it gets burnt up and uh lithium 6
well that can uh absorb a neutron breed
more lithium 7 and then undergo this uh
accelerated fishing process but
nevertheless all the lithium in a modest
sized star tends to be gone in less than
100 million years and so that's what
we're seeing here and the upper bound of
1.5 billion is based more on the
rotation. It takes a while for stars to
lose their initial load out of angular
momentum. They will emit material in the
form of a stellar wind away from the
surface and you can estimate the stellar
wind and we indeed measure it in many
cases. And it seems that that
interaction between that and the
magnetic field of the star acts like a
friction break and gradually slows down
the rotation. And um Wolf 359 is
rotating really quite slowly now. And so
it's most likely that it's u as old as 1
and a half billion years already. But
this is a very wide range.
And in terms of lifetime, well, at such
a tiny mass, hasn't got much fuel, but
it burning it so incredibly slowly. Um,
and it will burn it all because these
little red dwarf stars are fully
stirred. They're fully convective. They
access all the available hydrogen. Um,
unlike a star like the sun that will be
very wasteful and leave a lot of the
hydrogen left over. And so, this guy is
going to live around 3 trillion years.
Quite incredible. much longer than the
current age of the universe.
Now that low temperature also gives rise
to something strange in the spectrum.
It's below the ionization temperature of
many uh chemical bonds. And so we are
able to see molecules carbon monoxide,
water, um, metal hydrides, things like
iron hydide, cobalt hydide forming in
the star, and indeed oxides. Titanium
oxide is often one that gets detected.
We use that in white paint, don't we?
that uh we can see the stretching of the
bonds in the infrared part of the
spectrum and make all sorts of
detections in the
outer layers of the star just because
it's below that 3,000.
But these red dwarf stars, they sound
placid and low and slow, but they do
make flares. And it's the case with
pretty much all of them. They vary in
how powerful and how often these flares
occur. And this particular chart here is
in fact uh wolf 359 also known as CN
Leonus. And uh it releases quite
powerful flares
occasionally
and when it does they carry with them a
lot of energy, a lot of radio waves but
also ultraviolet, x-ray and gammaray
radiation. So, uh, it's not good to be
near one when one of these flares goes
off, unless unless you have some sort
of, uh, amazing protection system just
because of the enormous radiation.
Now, in terms of planets, this is
something that I'm very interested in. I
did some work once studying the uh,
Kepler space telescope data to try to
determine if we could find any
transiting exoplanets and found a few
candidates. Um but here the initial
studies failed to reveal any uh
decentsized planets close in. So
anything greater than or equal to the
size of Neptune in a fairly close orbit
was ruled out by a combination of the
radial velocity studies and uh no
detections of any significant transits.
But recently the radial velocity method
has suggested that we have a couple of
planets based on the sort of curve that
you see here. You can see the plotted
points with their error bars. The error
bars are quite significant. They're
nearly as big as the whole of the
wobble, but you could convince yourself
there was a periodic nature to that
signal. Um, since the initial
announcement of two planets, one of them
has been ruled out, but the other one
does indeed appear to be there. And this
is quite a large planet indeed. It's uh
a super Neptune. It's 44 Earth masses
and orbits not close to the star, 1.8
astronomical units. So that would in our
solar system be beyond Mars. Um, so
quite a large planet orbiting round for
a very, very small star. And because
that star is so small and has such a low
power output, Wolf 359b
is going to be chilly. It's going to
receive a tiny fraction of the amount of
heat that even Neptune does from the
sun. So, this is going to be a very cold
world indeed. But I suspect we're going
to find more smaller planets in uh
different orbits, perhaps closer in to
Wolf 359 as our instrumentation and
technology improves.
Now, Wolf 359 being one of the nearest
stars to the sun is a favorite of
science fiction. And I particularly
remember watching on a repeat. I wasn't
uh watching The Outer Limits in 1964.
Not even I am that old. But I did watch
it later and there was an episode
entitled Wolf 359 which had this strange
ghostly alien uh that was visiting uh
the poor protagonist of our story. Um if
you get the chance do watch it but um
it's uh aged a little bit, should we
say. And it's also the case that Wolf
359 was the supposed location for the
major Star Trek Battle with the Borg.
Um, I don't think the star plays any
part other than just being a location
fairly near the sun. And of course,
everybody had heard of this uh star in
the uh list of the 30 nearest stars to
the sun. So, I'll leave you with this
picture here. Thanks very much for
listening. The arrow is pointing at a
very nice little image of Wolf 359
showing the little red dwarf star. Uh
you can see a couple of galaxies in that
photo as well. Leo, of course, where it
lives is the realm of the galaxies. So,
thanks very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed that trip once
around Wolf 359.